we thought we'd take a look at something
that will already be underway once we
get back and that is the census the only
reason to open the door for a stranger
unless he tells you he has candy in his
van in that case they've got to see what
he's offering right what if he has fudge
the census is a long-standing American
tradition and every decade the
government rolls out eye catching TV ads
to encourage participation like this one
from 1980 in 80 million mailboxes across
the USA
[Music]
cow on me
okay first I'll say this that is a
beautiful song I mean it's no each it
Bob but frankly what is and second and
more importantly can we actually count
on you Mickey
it's 1980 you're in a tuxedo in the
middle of the day and your pupils at the
size of personal pan pizzas we all know
what that means Mick
you've been baking with booger sugar
pork in the Royal Diller riding the
white Rail Express diploma ha what I'm
just what I'm trying to say here is
Mickey Mouse has a really serious
cocaine problem listen I'm just stating
a fact a Disney fact the concept of the
senses is very simple at the start of
each decade the government does a
comprehensive count of every single
person residing in the United States not
just citizens not just voters every
single person because only by knowing
how many people live where can
communities effectively plan to provide
things like roads schools and emergency
services and it's usually conducted
through mail in forms sometimes
supplemented by in-person interviews as
this training film for the 1940 census
shows now what are the names of the
other persons living here with you mrs.
McGee and will you make Junior we have
to count babies also are there any
babies here what what did you say what
kind of weird answer is that
I'm calling it right now that woman ate
her baby that is not that is a fact
that is a Disney fact and and however
hard counting every single person seems
it's actually much harder because some
groups can be particularly tricky to
count including children those living in
remote areas homeless people and of
course the Olsen twin now they want to
up be clear on this they will tell you
that there are two of them but one of
them is lying so so to accomplish all of
this the government opens 250 regional
offices hires around half a million
temporary workers and Mail's
notifications to over 140 million
households conducting the census is the
largest and most complicated peacetime
operation that the government undertakes
and the 2020 census is likely to be even
more challenging than usual for reasons
ranging from budget shortfalls to active
Republican meddling so tonight let's
talk about it and let's start with what
questions are actually on the census
because a lot of people don't know what
they are and that very much includes the
current President himself they go
through houses they go up there ring
doorbells he talk to people how many
toilets do they have how many desks do
they have any beds what's their worst
made of
what are you talking about no one will
go to your house and ask how many
toilets you have because the answer
should be the same for everyone and
that's for one for pees one for poops
one for guests and one for groups the
normal amount of toilets for the record
the Center's ask you just a few basic
questions your name age sex race or
ethnicity how many people live in your
home and how they related to one another
and whether you rent or own that is
essentially it and yet some people still
do not want to engage with the census
partly because nobody really likes
filling out surveys and and partly
because when the government asks
questions people can get paranoid there
is a whole sub-genre of YouTube videos
from the last census where libertarians
filmed themselves
taunting census workers like this one
filmed by a man who insisted the census
was unconstitutional and then added this
to the mix that's way too personal of
information because they said something
gets you but you're a stranger I can
show you news stories of census workers
that have come and come back and raped
and killed people
okay - two key things there one that
census worker seems like a very nice
lady who has never killed anyone
and so you are being so obnoxious I
would honestly understand if she was
suddenly tempted to break that streak
and some so everyone knows the census is
very much constitutional in fact it's
not just in the Constitution it's the
sixth sentence
think about how significant that is
freedom of speech didn't even make it in
there at all they had to tack that on
later in the eighteenth century
equivalent of a post-it note and it is
critically important that people
participate in a census for a start
census data is used to evenly distribute
political power across the states seats
in the House of Representatives are
divided up based on population and after
every census adjustments are made for
example after the last one Texas gained
four seats and Ohio lost - and some
states are anxious about being under
counted as this story from Minnesota
shows the eighth congressional seat that
we have we've held onto it for some time
we barely held on to it in 2010 and in
2020 it looks like we're in the same
situation again where we're very close
to losing that seat right and that would
be bad for them because losing a seat in
Congress it's much like losing one in
musical chairs someone is going to be
very disappointed only this time it's an
entire state and not just Aiden I'm
sorry Aiden I'm sorry Aidan but you've
got a slow but better you learn to live
with it now and census data also plays a
crucial role in directing government
funding hundreds of federal programs use
census data to distribute well over
eight hundred and eighty billion dollars
to states and localities and if your
community's population count is off even
by just a tiny percentage it can have
real consequences take the the city of
Circle Pines Minnesota in the last
census they were just eighty-two people
shy of the 5,000 person threshold
required to qualify for certain state
roads funds and local officials were
very frustrated because they believed
that they'd had an undercount
so they do not want that to happen again
and luckily they have found the hero
that Circle Pines deserves
I became census man when I was elected
to lead the census initiative in our
city which is a vitally important
initiative listen I absolutely love the
fact there was a census themed superhero
although I will say this his only
superpower seems to be reminding people
the census exists it's like if Batman
didn't fight crime he just wandered
around and told people interesting facts
about bats bats couldn't eat up to 1200
mosquitoes an hour
goodbye enjoy your mugging citizen and
we haven't even gotten into the fact
that businesses also use census data to
decide where to add jobs or open stores
so it is absolutely vital to get the
census right that is why it's so
unfortunate that the president seems to
think it's a complete waste of time and
money they're spending fifteen billion
dollars or some ridiculous amount of
money on a census I don't know why we
can't do
the computers of the world because
frankly that's the way you can do it
census today is probably a lot more
accurately so obviously there was a lot
to unpack there but but let me let me
just quickly pick up on computers of the
world I refuse to take computer advice
from Donald Trump have you ever seen him
use one can you even picture that
happening in your mind right now Donald
Trump clicking a mouse typing with his
fingers no way here is a photo that he
posted during a reddit AMA and he looks
like he's scared that if he touches the
laptop it will burn him now as for that
whole cost issue Congress has actually
underfunded the bureau by hundreds of
millions of dollars for years during
which time critical preparations for
their sensors needed to be made and that
is not good because next year for the
first time ever the bureau will be
asking most people to answer the sensors
online which could make counting
everyone
easier provided the government's website
works properly you do not want another
healthcare.gov on your hands and website
whose launch was so flawed that you may
well recall only six people were able to
use it to sign up for health insurance
on its first day fun fact though six
people the cast of friends I mean could
they be any luckier
to avoid problems typically the bureau
does multiple full-scale test runs in
different locations to make sure that
everything is not only working but that
it will work in a variety of difficult
account areas it had planned to do three
test runs this time in an urban setting
there are rural setting and on tribal
lands but thanks to budget constraints
it ended up only doing one in Providence
County Rhode Island where they didn't
even have a marketing budget one library
actually tried to help there by offering
people coupons for five dollars off late
fees if they filled in a census on a
tablet computer there but the results
were underwhelming how long has this
been up about couple weeks like this and
how many people have converted to use
unfortunately well here's the thing a
lot of people have looked at it you know
so far we've had one that I can yeah
that can vouch for one person's come in
and done it and you know and the coupon
was an incentive on that he's a pig I
actually have a confession here I am
Batman I had two hundred and thirty
three thousand dollars in late fees in
Providence Rhode Island and now I have
just two hundred and thirty two thousand
nine hundred ninety five dollars and
guess what I'm still not returning the
copy of Eat Pray Love that I borrowed in
2004 I just committed the perfect crime
admitting it on camera probably isn't
ideal but no regrets so so the
2020 census was always going to be a big
challenge but instead of being able to
focus their undivided attention on all
these issues the Bureau has had to
expend time and energy dealing with this
overnight the Trump administration
announced the move that could impact the
balance of power for years to come the
2020 census will ask about citizenship
for the first time in decades Commerce
Secretary Wilbur Ross announcing the
decision following a request by the
Justice Department that's right you may
remember that that last year Wilbur Ross
who is in charge of the census and is
also what you would get if you put Elmer
Fudd in the oven at 425 for 90 minutes
he he announced a citizenship question
would be added to the census in a move
that even the bureau's chief scientist
said would harm the quality of the
census count which which makes sense
doesn't it because if you have the
government specifically this government
asking people if they are citizens many
may choose not to respond out of fear
that the information could be used
against them all people in their
household despite the fact and this is
really important to know it is against
the law for the bureau to disclose any
private information that identifies an
individual to anyone not the IRS not ice
not anyone
personal census information is actually
kept completely confidential for 72
years by which point let's face it we
will all be dead probably probably by
that census workers hand once he gets a
taste for but now now at the time at the
time Wilbur Ross claimed it was actually
the Justice Department who had requested
that citizenship question to better
enforce the Voting Rights Act which
immediately seemed like because
voting rights has never seemed exactly
like a top priority for this
administration and sure enough it later
emerged that it was Wilbur Ross who had
actually pressured the DOJ to request
the question from him now the reason why
involves this guy a republican
redistricting strategist named thomas
Hoffler here he is delivering a very
funny joke very well redistricting is
like an election in Reverse it's a great
event usually the voters get to pick the
politicians in redistricting the
politicians get to pick the voters your
nails it Tommy
but the thing is what he's saying there
is really bad he's just reciting a major
systemic problem with the cadence of a
joke which was also incidentally the
original title for this program now as
it happens that man died last year and
amazingly his death ended up exposing
Wilbur Ross's true reasons for asking
the citizenship question because when
HotList estranged daughter began to go
through his things she found something
very surprising his daughter finds these
zip drives and on the zip drive is this
tranche of information that essentially
shows that he had engineered this as a
plan explicitly to suppress minority
votes it's true his daughter found
documents on the hard drive that
essentially laid out Republican strategy
suit to suppress minorities voting power
and to use the Voting Rights Act as a
cover which is obviously appalling but
probably one of the least horrifying
things you could find on a hard drive
belonging to your dead father instantly
on that point if I ever die and anyone
finds mysterious hard drives belonging
to me just assume but they contain a
shady gerrymandering scheme that I'm
involved in don't even click just just
throw it straight out because it's
definitely a gerrymandering scheme and
definitely not my collection of hamsters
in tiny speedo tell me if it were that
there would be nothing wrong with it
because it's not technically illegal I
checked but but that doesn't matter
anyway because it's not my collection of
hamsters in tiny speedos it's talking
points about my gerrymandering scheme
I'm glad I'm glad we all got that clear
see you later the point is the point is
Hoffler had proposed the sister ship
question so he could make it easier for
Republicans to hold on to power and it
turns out he and the Trump
administration were in close contact
about the whole thing
and the scheme was so impossible to
justify three courts ruled against it
and finally the administration lost in
front of the Supreme Court and the
question was dropped
meaning the citizenship question will
not be on the census next year that is
really poor to understand will not be on
the sensor
here's the problem here's the problem
those who work with immigrant
communities say the damage won't
unfortunately already be done the
anxiety and fear among Chicago's Latino
families remains despite President
Trump's decision to back off on the
citizenship question on the 2020 census
the reluctancy is there because the
environment has been already created to
deter them exactly they've now created
an environment of fear people will still
be looking over their shoulder terrified
as incidentally that woman should
probably be because Susan Skellington is
right behind her waiting to pounce look
out it's Susan all in all there is a lot
working against this census and experts
are worried an undercount next year is
inevitable the only question is by how
much and the fear is it could be
millions so what can we do well it's
actually relatively simple all of us
living in America right now needs to
fill out the census next year and I know
you've seen a lot of people trying to
persuade you to do that tonight from a
superhero without superpowers to an
aspiring serial killer to a coked-up
Mouse and if you don't want to
participate in the census for them or
for yourself or for your community I
actually give you one more good reason
to participate and that is that it would
probably really irritate this guy
because think about it his
administration really thinks that
certain people don't count so what
better way to get back at him than to
make sure that you do and make the
census count you and you know what just
to make an extra mad want to include a
note telling him how many toilets you
have but remember should be full the
normal amount
Disney fact
[Applause]
you